{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf102
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica-Bold;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs48 \cf0 Change Log\
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\f1\b\fs28 \cf0 1.0.1
\f0\b0\fs24 \
\
Fixed a bug that could cause a message to be encrypted to the wrong recipient.\

\f1\b\fs28 \
1.0
\f0\b0\fs24 \
\
Now uses sheets instead of modal dialogs, making it easier to keep track of what windows go with what dialogs.  Show in finder afterwards and open afterwards now correctly show and open the output file rather than the input file.\
\

\f1\b\fs28 0.9.1
\f0\b0\fs24 \
\
Pretty icons.  Using new version of GPGME, gives more information when entering passphrases.\
\

\f1\b\fs28 0.9
\f0\b0\fs24 \
\
Fixed the error where it would sometimes not find the file that corresponded to a detached signature.  The (null) error with multiple signatures also seems to clear up some by upgrading to GnuPG 1.2.0.  The Tool Tips are more helpful.\
\

\f1\b\fs28 0.8.8
\f0\b0\fs24 \
\
Passphrase panel now works.  Signature statuses are human readable and provide roughly the same info the gpg does.  Everything is localizable that should be.  Sometimes when trying to verify multiple signatures one or more of the user IDs will be reported as `(null)'.  This is a bug in GPGME.  To see the user ID, try verification again.  Made the preference window more intuitive to use.\

\f1\b\fs28 \
0.8.1
\f0\b0\fs24 \
\
Fixed the errors with GPGAppKit so that you now get dialogs when you should.  Now contains some German translation thanks to Alexander Nouak.  The rest will come once the program is fully localizable.\
\

\f1\b\fs28 0.8
\f0\b0\fs24 \
\
First official release.  Took long enough.  ;-)}